[PIANO MUSIC]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Mr. Mandela who has walked
his first steps to freedom
into a new South Africa now
on his way to Cape Town.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In the name of peace,
democracy and freedom for all.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> For South Africa, the
greatest example of forgiveness
has been that Nelson Mandela.
He realized that the
most important thing
is to forgive those who
have caused him the problem.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When crimes and horrid
events like the Rwanda genocide
or other crimes
against humanity--
when those take place, there
are many processes socially that
have to go on.
There's reconciliation
that has to happen.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And I can give examples of
many people in Africa apart
from Nelson Mandela who
have totally forgiven.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I have lived with
the young girls who
even chose to forgive the
people who captured them,
people who mistreated them,
people who raped them.
And these girls can
repeat in their own words
that we want these
rebels to be forgiven.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> That something of my
being recognized as one
of the Time's 100 most
influential people in the world
has always been for me a
platform for doing better,
a platform for bringing up
the voice of the voiceless.
People need to listen to them.
People need to move
out and find how
we can make the world better.
I've seen young
women in my center
where I work with who have
gone out of their situation
and have forgiven,
becoming very beautiful.
You see them more relaxed.
You see them pulling
up as human beings.
And I totally believe that
stance is the right finding,
that with forgiveness, one
can truly live a healthy life.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I love the root of this
word from Latin, perdonare.
It's to me like
losing something.
In order to be able to forgive,
one must throw away something.
If you want to forgive,
you'll find you are already
losing something.
You are losing part of
your own selfishness.
And that means you are
setting yourself free,
and you find you are completely
walking toward somebody to say,
I forget my pride.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Well, you have a choice in
every relationship either to be
right or to be loving.
If you insist on being right and
you prove another person wrong,
you alienate them.
If you make them lose face,
they will never forgive you,
and you will never get
anything that you want.
So if you want to get
the best in relationships
and also the best
in every situation,
you should give up being
right totally and completely.
And the world will be yours.
>> We have to forgive
to spiritually awaken.
We have to forgive in order
to raise our vibration.
Forgiveness is this big boulder
that people wear on their back
and carry around
throughout their lives
until they let it go.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Choosing love is always
going to be revolutionary.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What makes our world where we
live in becomes a painful place
is because many of us do not
want to take that courage
to say, I'm going to
forgive that person.
I'm going to love.
I'm going to choose to love.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Love is something which must
take over everything we do.
So in order to be
able to forgive,
I think the first word
we need to pronounce
is to start loving.
>> A lot of people struggle
with not being able to forgive
themselves.
I think at times this can
be even more difficult
than forgiving somebody else.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I was able to forgive the
murder of my mom in a fairly
quick way.
But 10 years after her
murder, my brother, who had
discovered her body--
my brother committed suicide.
And I had felt like that I let
him down because he told me
he was feeling depressed.
And I really got caught
up in family dynamics
and did not really help him
the way I felt that I should.
So we have to be
patient with ourselves.
It helps to try to make a
decision that you're really
going to work on this.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On December 14 2012, an angry
young man shot his way through
the glass doors of Sandy Hook
Elementary and proceeded to gun
down twenty first-graders in two
first-grade classrooms and six
teachers and administrators in
one of the worst mass shootings
in US history.
My son Jesse Lewis
attended that school
and was in one of those
classrooms and became a victim.
I'm a single mom with two boys.
That day started
out like any other
and getting the boys
ready for school,
and I was getting
ready for work.
And I remember walking
Jesse out to meet his dad
at the end of the driveway.
I remember turning around
and giving Jesse a hug.
And I noticed that
he had written
in the frost with
his little fingernail
"I love you" on
the side of my car,
and he'd drawn little hearts
on each of the windows.
Taking a picture, and that
happened to be his last picture
ever taken and also my goodbye
message of "I love you."
And so I left for work.
I worked in Orange, Connecticut,
which is about 45 minutes away
from Sandy Hook.
Shortly after I
arrived at work, people
started coming up to
my desk and telling me
that there had been a
shooting in Sandy Hook.
Still actually I wasn't that
concerned, believe it or not.
And then we found that it
was at Sandy Hook Elementary
and that all the children
had been evacuated
and that the parents
were supposed to meet up
with them at the firehouse.
So I drove the 45 minutes
with my phone dinging,
ringing, people
calling in, telling me
that a teacher had been shot
in the foot and other details.
I really got concerned,
really concerned.
I was looking for my
little brown-headed boy
and not finding him.
So I remember going up to
anyone that looked official.
There were firemen
and policemen,
and there were even army men.
There were helicopters
flying overhead.
It was chaos.
And I was going up to anybody
that looked official saying,
have you seen my
son, Jesse Lewis?
I can't find him.
And finally somebody
said, I think
that he went to the house.
There's a little yellow house
on the left of the firehouse.
I think he went to that house.
And I ran over to that house
and knocked on the door,
and an older man answered.
And I said, was
Jesse Lewis here?
And he said, I think he was.
But I think he ran
over to the daycare.
Then I ran over to the daycare.
And Neil, his
father, is looking.
And we're texting
back and forth,
have you checked here,
have you checked there?
We couldn't find him.
And finally, Neil left to go
check the hospitals because all
of the lines were busy.
And I finally went
into that back room.
I put his name down on a
long list at the very bottom.
And I remember-- I mean,
I didn't think ever
in a million years that
all those people were dead.
Jesse had such energy
and such vibrance.
He was bouncing off the
walls, and he was so loud.
And his stuff was
all over the place.
And I thought, I'll never be
able to go back to my home
and see all of his things.
And the silence
will be deafening.
But there came a
time when I had to.
I remember walking in with
lots of family and friends
around me.
Walking back out
through the kitchen
and out through the front door,
when I noticed on our kitchen
chalkboard that Jesse had
written a message sometime
shortly before he died.
He wrote three words,
nurturing healing love.
And I knew that I
would be spending
the rest of my life spreading
this message of nurturing
healing love.
>> You have to realize that
you are at a point of choice.
You can focus on hate,
you can focus on fear,
or you can focus on love.
To me, it is
smarter, it is wiser,
it is more spiritual
to focus on love.
If you focus on love,
you get more love.
If you focus on hate,
you get more hate.
>> I have learned a
lot from the cells.
And I've learned that
happiness is the chemistry that
comes from a brain in love.
Love chemistry is
healing chemistry.
Fear chemistry is
what makes us sick.
>> When we ruminate, that is
involved in anger problems
and obsessive compulsive
problems, in depression,
in anxiety disorders.
>> 49 and 1/2 percent of our
college-bound US youth are
going to have a
diagnosable mental illness.
The majority of that
diagnoses is anxiety.
70% of these young adults
won't get professional help.
What are the long-term
effects of untreated anxiety?
They're mental illness,
violence, incarceration,
suicide, drug use--
everything that we're
seeing in our society.
We have a negative
bias in our society
where we like to focus on fear.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The government is the mind
because the mind send signals
to the cells.
50 trillion citizens called
cells feel your stress.
And stress is the biggest cause
of illness on this planet.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We all have between 60,000
and 80,000 thoughts a day.
We know also through
research that the majority
of those thoughts, as many as
70%, are angry, not productive,
and don't serve us.
Knowing that we have all
of these negative thoughts,
we have to start being aware.
And we have to start choosing
loving and positive thoughts.
Because when we choose love,
that will positively impact us.
And through the
ripple effect, it
will make this a safer, more
peaceful and loving world.
>> And if you can walk on
this planet without that fear,
then you are free.
Because it's the fear
that makes us a prisoner.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we don't forgive
others, we are directly linked.
We remain in the
same prison together.
Because I am holding that person
in prison when I don't forgive.
>> I felt like I was attached
to the shooter with an umbilical
cord, and it ran out of
my side and into his.
And all of my personal
power drained out
of me in the form of
anger through this cord
and into the shooter.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Forgiveness for me was
a big set of scissors.
I cut that cord that
attached me to pain.
And literally
almost immediately,
all my personal power
flowed back into me.
And it was such a relief.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have to let go of
the resentment, the anger,
the hurt, the perceived pain
in order to live the miracle
of right now.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> This is the power
of forgiveness.
It frees you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Letting go is not
only a good idea--
it is absolutely essential.
Because there is nothing in
the world that is permanent.
Everything in the
world is an activity.
Right now this experience
you're having is impermanent.
Your body that you
have today was not
the body you had as a child.
Your thoughts, your
emotions that you have right
now weren't the ones
that you had last night.
So trying to hold
on to something
is like holding on to the wind.
You cannot do it.
It's impossible.
When you recognize that you
cannot hold on to anything,
then you enjoy the
moment, every moment.
No regrets, no
anticipation, no resistance,
just this moment as it is.
>> When you have an
injury in your body,
even if the pain is gone,
you can see the scar.
The scar remains as
a constant reminder
that something has
happened in your life.
But in order to forgive,
you need the courage
to know that this scar exists.
This scar is part
of me, but it is not
going to hurt me
as it hurt before.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We believe that we
are running our life with
our conscious mind, but we
also have a subconscious mind.
That's like an auto pilot.
The subconscious was programmed
by our parents, our family,
and our community.
When we're operating
from subconscious mind,
we're operating from programs
that we got from other people.
The problem is 95%
of our behavior
is coming from the programs,
not from conscious.
But all of us do that.
So when you are talking
to someone or watching,
95% is not coming from them.
If we understand
this, then you have
to let go of problems
with other people.
So we have to forgive other
people when you recognize
it did not come from them.
It was just their history.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Up until that point, JT
had not gone back to school.
Frankly, I didn't want him to.
I had sent one child to school,
and he didn't come home.
And so I would go
into JT's room,
and I would try to wake him up.
And I would say, do you
want to go to school today?
And he would say no,
and I would feel relief.
So we were really alone, but we
had this incredible experience
happen where orphan genocide
survivors from Rwanda
wanted to reach out to JT.
They'd heard about
what happened,
and they wanted to
share their story.
>> And this is at a time when
you're not sure if you'll ever
feel happy again.
And so they reach out, and they
say, you will get through this.
Life will get better.
And that was an
encouraging conversation
we had with them at that time.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Afterwards, JT and I started
making our own gratitude list
and realizing that we really did
have a lot to be grateful for.
We both talked
about the importance
of forgiving for ourselves.
And then I saw JT
writing in a journal.
>> And I thought, well, I can
raise money to help them with
their educations because
that was something I found.
None of them were able to
continue their educations.
So I raised some money
by selling bracelets
with some friends.
>> He went back to school the
next day on his own and started
an organization called
Newtown Helps Rwanda.
>> So my foundation,
Newtown Helps Rwanda,
started out in Rwanda helping
those kids go to college.
But it expanded.
>> Did you guys hear about the
tragedy that happened there?
Yeah, the man who did
that, the young man, he
was a former student.
I started looking at his life.
As a young child,
he was neglected.
He was ignored.
He didn't have friends.
It was really the
key to my resilience.
I did it for my own
survival because I
knew that somebody who could
have done something so horrible
must have been in a
tremendous amount of pain.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> People must learn to hate.
And if they can learn to hate,
they can be taught to love.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What I've found is that
giving back to others after
a tragedy like this is a great
way to overcome your pain.
>> I really believe
that doing for others,
being compassionate is the
most powerful form of therapy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Jesse had really guided
my direction following
the shooting with his
chalkboard message.
And I also knew
that if Adam Lanza
had been able to give and
receive nurturing healing love
that the tragedy would
never have happened.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When you say
choosing love, and I
think some people might
even say, that sounds good,
but what's in it for me?
And there is so tremendously
much in it for you.
The benefits are incredible,
every single one.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It is not necessary to
maintain positivity all
the time.
You'll be a very boring
person if you do that.
It should be natural.
But you start by witnessing
your own reactions to the world.
>> We have to start looking
at ourselves and saying,
what programs am I playing?
And therefore, we also
have to forgive ourselves.
Because we are also
playing programs.
>> And if you're in the
constant habit of criticizing,
condemning, complaining,
playing the victim,
observe yourself doing that.
Just observing yourself doing
that changes your own behavior.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So my advice is
become a silent observer
of your reaction to react.
The great Indian teacher
Krishnamurti said the highest
form of human intelligence is
the ability to observe yourself
without judging yourself.
And when you observe yourself,
your life will transform.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The old program that we
grew up with is a program
of separation.
We are separate from each other.
A country is separated
from another country.
And separation is like disease.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In my body if some
of my cells say, look,
I am separating from
the other cells--
like cancer separates
from the normal cells.
But you can't have
a healthy body
if one community is separated
from the other community.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> People saying that Australia
was founded and discovered--
it wasn't founded.
It wasn't discovered.
Because there's always
been a people here.
There's always been
a language here.
There's always been a
connection to country.
>> Artifacts that are around
here and there of over 50,000
years old, and they still say
there's no aboriginal people
here and claim the
place is terra nullius,
so there's not as many people
here as indigenous people.
And throughout this area
here, our connection is--
that's our [NON-ENGLISH].
That's our mother.
That's our coeur.
Our heart.
>> Aboriginal people
are very caring people,
like to look after people.
>> To my knowledge, we--
I don't know of any
wars that ever happened
with aboriginal people.
>> When the Westerners first
came to this part of Australia,
we seen the big sail ships.
We'd never seen
sail ships before.
>> And so when my
great-great-great-grandfather
saw this ship coming and he
saw these pale faces of white
people, he thought it was our
ancestors' spirits coming back.
And he welcomed them.
[NON-ENGLISH], he shouted.
>> As soon as they came ashore,
they had to start pushing
people back out of the way
if they were going to start
to massacre and
indiscriminately killing people.
>> From the Westerners
coming here, a lot,
a lot of destruction
was done like massacres,
killing of people,
taking of the land.
>> There was really no
negotiation that took place
or anything like that.
It was an invasion
of the privacy
and the way of life and
the spiritual connections
that those people have
with that country.
>> Aboriginal people
have a connection,
a spiritual connection to
the place where they belong.
When a lot of the invasion
and the stolen generation
happened, a lot of language
groups, some lines got lost.
And this is where a lot of
the identity of our people
started to disappear.
>> It's never really been
told, how barbaric it was,
how insidious, stealing
stolen generations.
You take children away from
their parents and stuff,
and they either utilize them
for up north to work on stations
and as cleaners or--
and try to give them
a new identity of understanding
that there's a great god
that they all believe in.
So a lot of times, too,
because there wasn't many,
like, Englishwomen
around, they would have it
off with a lot of the
aboriginal women as well.
[DIDGERIDOO]
>> And as soon as their
blood got European blood
into the aboriginal blood,
their skin got fairer.
And A.O. Neville took
these children away.
>> I really I think it
was that separation,
separation from the family,
from that spiritual connection
and way of life.
Because those kids
would have been still
had instilled in the
knowledge, and they
would've started to pass it
on to their future generations
as well.
>> The stolen generation
was a way to get rid
of the Aboriginal
people in Australia.
>> But also try and explain
a lot of the things that have
been covered up.
And that way, all the ignorance
and racism and stuff, you know,
that'll start to dissipate.
Because people will have more
of an understanding and so that
they can make up their own mind.
>> I think that we should
be kind of educated
in the understanding
of what happened.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Choosing love, being
courageous enough to be
grateful, to forgive, and to
practice compassion in action,
doing for others, is
the key to happiness.
>> Every time a tragedy happens,
if we can't find some sort
of positive to bring out of
it, we've lost all these lives
for nothing.
>> I know from personal
experience that forgiveness is
hard, but we can do it.
And it can make the
world a better place.
>> Choosing love can
change the entire world.
It begins with you, of
course, and it begins with me.
We'll actually create
a ripple effect
to awaken everybody
on the planet
begin to choose love
themselves as well.
But it begins with you,
and it begins with me.
>> A new device called
magnetoencephalograph, MEG,
the probe reads
the brain out here.
That means your brain is
broadcasting information
to the world.
And this is why it's
important for us
to have good thoughts, loving
thoughts, harmony thoughts.
>> When you become
strong inside,
that's when you can forgive
people who have done wrong
by you.
And that's when you
can start to trust.
And when you start to trust
is when you begin to love.
Forgiveness cannot happen
unless there is strength inside
someone's self.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When I understood
this new science,
which is now called epigenetics,
then I decided I would change
my life by changing just the
way I see life and how I respond
to life.
And my life completely changed.
>> I actually think he is
awakening us to our inner power
and empowering us to make
decisions and not be victim
to our DNA and victim to
our epigenetics and victim
to our biology and awaken
different parts of our mind
and body to go in the
direction we prefer.
>> Healing comes from
the land and the people.
We should all be
together because it's
going to be a long process
to heal and walk together
in the future.
>> Revolution is to break down
the barriers between people.
The evolution is to
break the borders down
between the countries.
The evolution is
all humans are cells
in the body of a super
organism called humanity.
The more people that are
broadcasting love, the more
power in the broadcast, the more
love becomes part of our world.
And this is the future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]